Migrate plugins from M4 to M5 (#188)
mautic/developer-documentation-new: docs/plugins/from-4-to-5.rst

> Plugin upgrade from 4 to 5 step by step

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update plugins for Mautic 5
```
I think a shorter title works better in the nav structure etc. These docs are for the 5.x release so we should assume they're on Mautic 4.

=======================================

Here is a list of steps that most of the Plugins may need to take to upgrade from Mautic 4 to Mautic 5. You should be able to get through each step, make a commit, move to the next one and once you are at finished you have upgraded your Plugin.

> 1) Continuous Integration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Continuous Integration
```
We don't use numbers in headings, so I'd suggest removing this (you'll need to shorten the underline also)

Author: The aim was to have an ordered list of steps. Is that not possible to do in headings so each step has some details?

Reviewer: We use the [Google Styleguide for Technical Writing](https://developers.google.com/style/headings#heading-and-title-format) as our styleguide, which specifically states:

> Don't include numbers in headings to indicate a sequence of sections.

Author: Hmm. Too bad. I like steps. I can then refer to them easily as "I got stuck on step 5". But I guess it doesn't make sense to disagree with Google...

Reviewer: I expect that the preferred route would be to have a numerated list under a single heading, instead of using headings (which are used for navigation) to denote the numbered steps. It does look weird having the numbers in the navigation on the left when you build the docs, also.

-------------------------

> If you don't have CI configured, this is the time to do it. This is an optional step but it makes sense to do it at the beginning rather than later. Here's how to get it done: https://devdocs.mautic.org/en/5.x/plugins/continuous-integration.html

Reviewer: Let's use the built-in referencing tools:

```suggestion
If you don't have CI configured, this is the time to do it. This is an optional step but it makes sense to do it at the beginning rather than later. Here's how to get it done: :doc:`/plugins/continuous-integration`.
```

> In your PR add also PHP 8.1 and 8.2. And upgrade the Mautic version from 4.4 to 5.1. One more thing is that Mautic 5 have ``local.php`` in ``config/local.php`` instead of ``app/config/local.php`` so update that as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your PR add also support for PHP 8.1 and 8.2, and upgrade the Mautic version from 4.4 to 5.1. One more thing is that Mautic 5 have ``local.php`` in ``config/local.php`` instead of ``app/config/local.php`` so update that as well.
```

> 2) Autowiring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Autowiring
```

-------------

> Mautic 5 comes with autowiring of PHP services which means the developer experience is way better and the code size gets reduced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mautic 5 comes with autowiring of PHP services which means the developer experience is much improved, and the code size is reduced.
```

> There is a great doc already written on this topic so get that setup and come back: https://devdocs.mautic.org/en/5.x/plugins/autowiring.html

Reviewer: Let's use the internal referencing:

```suggestion
There is a great doc already written on this topic: :doc:`/plugins/autowiring` - so refer to that for instructions.
```

> To quickly check that all services are wired and configured correctly you may find this command faster than refreshing the browser window:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To quickly verify that the wiring of services is complete and configured correctly you may find this command faster than refreshing the browser window:
```

``rm -rf var/cache && bin/console``

> .. note:: Ideally, you should be able to delete the whole ``services`` section from your ``config.php`` file. But do that as a cherry on top once you are sure everything is working. See step 5 that could get you stuck good. There may be others like it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  .. note:: Ideally, you should be able to delete the whole ``services`` section from your ``config.php`` file, but do that as a cherry on top once you are sure everything is working as the later steps in this process may yet cause you difficulties.
```

> 3) config.php - controllers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``config.php`` - controllers
```

---------------------------

> config.php should be way lighter now when all services are gone after autowiring is configured. There is one more thing to check. The controllers are now defined with a different syntax. Here is an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``config.php`` should be much lighter now when all services are gone after autowiring is configured. There is one more thing to verify. The controllers are now defined with a different syntax. Here is an example:
```

.. code:: diff

   - 'controller' => 'CronfigBundle:Cronfig:index',
   + 'controller' => 'MauticPlugin\CronfigBundle\Controller\CronfigController::indexAction'

> Symfony 5 is way more explicit. That's a good thing even if it's longer. You don't have to guess what the syntax is. It's basically just standard FQCN (Fully Qualified Class Name) with the full method name behind the 2 colons. You don't even need to call the controller method `*Action` anymore. Your choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Symfony 5 is much more explicit. That's a good thing even if it's longer. You don't have to guess what the syntax is. It's basically just standard FQCN (Fully Qualified Class Name) with the full method name behind the 2 colons. You don't even need to call the controller method `*Action` any more.
```

> 4) Rendering Views

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rendering views
```

------------------

> As the PHP templating engine was removed from Symfony 5, Mautic had to switch to Twig. And your Plugin must follow. Here is a helpful resource on how to migrate the `*.html.php` files to `*.html.twig` files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As Symfony 5 removed the PHP templating engine, Mautic had to switch to Twig. Your Plugin must also update the any views from PHP to Twig. Here is a helpful resource on how to migrate the ``*.html.php`` files to ``*.html.twig`` files:
```

> https://github.com/mautic/mautic/blob/5.x/UPGRADE-PHP-TO-TWIG-TEMPLATES.md

Reviewer: We now have the ``make link`` command that you can run in the terminal, which generates the link files you'll notice in /links. These can then be referenced using a single command, and also checked with our linter to ensure the links are valid. It also means there's only one place to update links if they are broken.

Using the command provides you with the syntax that you can then copy and paste into your content, as below. I'll commit the file I created to the PR.

It'll look like this:

![screenshot-devdocs ddev site-2024 04 26-10_39_54](https://github.com/mautic/developer-documentation-new/assets/2930593/54155b72-5b38-4525-ba04-a43849c498f4)

The 'link text' is what shows to the user.

```suggestion
:xref:`PHP to Twig migration`
```

In the controllers, you'll also have to update the view paths like this:

.. code:: diff

   - $this->renderView('MauticCoreBundle:Notification:flash_messages.html.php');
   + $this->renderView('@MauticCore/Notification/flash_messages.html.twig');

Running this command is faster than refreshing all the views in the browser. It validates the Twig syntax and can guide you through the process:

``bin/console lint:twig plugins/MyBundle``

.. note:: Update MyBundle with your bundle name.

> 5) The Integration Class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. vale off

The Integration class
```

> ------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
------------------------

.. vale on

```

> If you went ahead and deleted all services from ``config.php`` with a smile on your face, you may find yourself in a pickle if you are using Mautic's Integration classes and interfaces. The inner workings of the IntegrationsBundle expects that your integration has a service key in a specific format. This should be improved for Mautic 6, but for now add an alias to ``services.php``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you went ahead and deleted all services from ``config.php``, you may experience problems if you're using Mautic's Integration classes and interfaces. The inner workings of the IntegrationsBundle expects that your Integration has a service key in a specific format. Mautic 6 aims to improve this, but for now, add an alias to ``services.php``:
```

> .. code:: php

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code:: php

```
Line break is needed otherwise the code block doesn't render correctly.

>    $services->alias('mautic.integration.[MY_INTEGRAION]', \MauticPlugin\[MY_INTEGRAION]Bundle\Integration\[MY_INTEGRAION]Integration::class);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   $services->alias('mautic.integration.[MY_INTEGRATION]', \MauticPlugin\[MY_INTEGRATION]Bundle\Integration\[MY_INTEGRATION]Integration::class);
```

Guessing this should be the correct spelling.

> .. note:: Replace `[MY_INTEGRAION]` with your Plugin name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note:: Replace `[MY_INTEGRATION]` with your Plugin name.
```

> 6) Compiler Passes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compiler passes
```

------------------

> If you Plugin uses a compiler pass, you may have to double-check that it works correctly. In many cases you may have to change the service alias with FQCN like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your Plugin uses a compiler pass, you may have to verify that it works correctly. In many cases you may have to change the service alias with FQCN like so:
```

.. code:: diff

   - ->setDecoratedService('mautic.form.type.email', 'mautic.form.type.email.inner');
   + ->setDecoratedService(EmailType::class, 'mautic.form.type.email.inner')

> 7) Getting container in tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Getting container in tests
```

-----------------------------

This one is a quick find and replace:

.. code:: diff

   - $handlerStack = self::$container->get('mautic.http.client.mock_handler');
   + $handlerStack = static::getContainer()->get(MockHandler::class);

Notice you can also use FQCN instead of string service keys which is more convenient.

> 8) Automated Refactoring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automated refactoring
```

------------------------

> Your Plugin should be working on Mautic 5 by now. Wouldn't it be great to shorten the code a little more? Mautic 5 uses PHP 8.0+ so can take advantage of the syntax. And Rector can upgrade the code for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your Plugin should be working on Mautic 5 by now. Wouldn't it be great to shorten the code a little more? Mautic 5 uses PHP 8.0+ so can take advantage of the syntax. Rector can upgrade the code for you.
```

Run ``bin/rector process plugins/MyBundle`` and review the changes.

.. note:: Update MyBundle with your bundle name.

> 9) Automated Code Style

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automated code style
```

-----------------------

> Another great way how to improve your Plugin code base quality is to run the CS Fixer: `bin/php-cs-fixer fix plugins/MyBundle`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another great way how to improve your Plugin code base quality is to run the CS Fixer: ``bin/php-cs-fixer fix plugins/MyBundle``.
```

.. note:: Update MyBundle with your bundle name.

> 10) Static Analysis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Static analysis
```

-------------------

> PHPSTAN is another amazing tool that detects bugs for you. It's better to run it on the whole codebase including core Mautic so it's aware of all classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PHPSTAN is another amazing tool that detects bugs for you. It's better to run it on the whole codebase including core Mautic, so it's aware of all classes.
```

Run ``composer phpstan``

> If your plugin has way too many PHPSTAN errors than you can handle right now, consider using [PHPSTAN baseline](https://phpstan.org/user-guide/baseline). It allows you to store your tech debt to a single file and it forces you to write better code from now on. And you can reduce the baseline by small chunks every month to get to 0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your Plugin has more PHPSTAN errors than you can handle right now, consider using [PHPSTAN baseline](https://phpstan.org/user-guide/baseline). It allows you to store your tech debt to a single file and it forces you to write better code from now on. And you can reduce the baseline by small chunks every month to get to 0.
```

> Update plugins for Mautic 5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update Plugins for Mautic 5
```

Getting container in tests
-----------------------------

This one is a quick find and replace:

.. code:: diff

   - $handlerStack = self::$container->get('mautic.http.client.mock_handler');
   + $handlerStack = static::getContainer()->get(MockHandler::class);

Notice you can also use FQCN instead of string service keys which is more convenient.

Automated refactoring
------------------------

Your Plugin should be working on Mautic 5 by now. Wouldn't it be great to shorten the code a little more? Mautic 5 uses PHP 8.0+ so can take advantage of the syntax. Rector can upgrade the code for you.

Run ``bin/rector process plugins/MyBundle`` and review the changes.

.. note:: Update MyBundle with your bundle name.

Automated code style
-----------------------

Another great way how to improve your Plugin code base quality is to run the CS Fixer: ``bin/php-cs-fixer fix plugins/MyBundle``.

.. note:: Update MyBundle with your bundle name.

Static analysis
-------------------

PHPSTAN is another amazing tool that detects bugs for you. It's better to run it on the whole codebase including core Mautic, so it's aware of all classes.

Run ``composer phpstan``

> If your Plugin has more PHPSTAN errors than you can handle right now, consider using [PHPSTAN baseline](https://phpstan.org/user-guide/baseline). It allows you to store your tech debt to a single file and it forces you to write better code from now on. And you can reduce the baseline by small chunks every month to get to 0.

Reviewer: Please make a link for this one too, using `make link` at the terminal. Sorry I missed it before! 

It'll give you the xref to copy/paste in its place. I'd use 'PHPSTAN baseline' for the text the user sees, and phpstan_baseline as the filename.

Copy/paste the xref into the content, then commit the link file and you should be good to go!

Author: It's easier just to remove the link completely.
```suggestion
If your Plugin has more PHPSTAN errors than you can handle right now, consider using PHPSTAN baseline. It allows you to store your tech debt to a single file and it forces you to write better code from now on. And you can reduce the baseline by small chunks every month to get to 0.
```

Reviewer: I think that it's helpful to point people to the documentation - I can do it and commit it no problem (it's three steps at command line).
